It’s a common fallacy to envision these species as arranged in a straight line
of descent, with Ergaster begetting Erectus, Erectus begetting the
Neanderthals, and the Neanderthals evolving into us. This linear model gives
the mistaken impression that at any particular moment only one type of human
inhabited the earth, and that all earlier species were merely older models of
ourselves. The truth is that from about 2 million years ago until around
10,000 years ago, the world was home, at one and the same time, to several
human species. And why not? Today there are many species of foxes, bears and
pigs. The earth of a hundred millennia ago was walked by at least six
different species of man. It’s our current exclusivity, not that multi-species
past, that is peculiar – and perhaps incriminating. As we will shortly see, we
Sapiens have good reasons to repress the memory of our siblings.

## The Cost of Thinking

Despite their many differences, all human species share several defining
characteristics. Most notably, humans have extraordinarily large brains
compared to other animals. Mammals weighing sixty kilograms have an average
brain size of 200 cubic centimetres. The earliest men and women, 2.5 million
years ago, had brains of about 600 cubic centimetres. Modern Sapiens sport a
brain averaging 1,200–1,400 cubic centimetres. Neanderthal brains were even
bigger.

That evolution should select for larger brains may seem to us like, well, a
no-brainer. We are so enamoured of our high intelligence that we assume that
when it comes to cerebral power, more must be better. But if that were the
case, the feline family would also have produced cats who could do calculus.
Why is genus _Homo_ the only one in the entire animal kingdom to have come up
with such massive thinking machines?

The fact is that a jumbo brain is a jumbo drain on the body. It’s not easy to
carry around, especially when encased inside a massive skull. It’s even harder
to fuel. In _Homo sapiens_ , the brain accounts for about 2–3 per cent of
total body weight, but it consumes 25 per cent of the body’s energy when the
body is at rest. By comparison, the brains of other apes require only 8 per
cent of rest-time energy. Archaic humans paid for their large brains in two
ways. Firstly, they spent more time in search of food. Secondly, their muscles
atrophied. Like a government diverting money from defence to education, humans
diverted energy from biceps to neurons. It’s hardly a foregone conclusion that
this is a good strategy for survival on the savannah. A chimpanzee can’t win
an argument with a _Homo sapiens_ , but the ape can rip the man apart like a
rag doll.

Today our big brains pay off nicely, because we can produce cars and guns that
enable us to move much faster than chimps, and shoot them from a safe distance
instead of wrestling. But cars and guns are a recent phenomenon. For more than
2 million years, human neural networks kept growing and growing, but apart
from some flint knives and pointed sticks, humans had precious little to show
for it. What then drove forward the evolution of the massive human brain
during those 2 million years? Frankly, we don’t know.

